Instructions on how to install .NET for Apache Spark interactive notebooks on Azure HDInsight (#17119)
dotnet/docs: docs/spark/how-to-guides/hdinsight-notebook-installation.md

---
title: Install .NET for Apache Spark Interactive Notebooks on Azure HDInsight

> description: Learn how to install .NET for Apache Spark Interactive Notebooks on Azure HDInsight

Author: Changed to Jupyter Notebooks, does this need to be lower case?

ms.date: 02/18/2020
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.custom: mvc,how-to
---

> # Install .NET for Apache Spark Interactive Notebooks on Azure HDInsight

Author: I like the idea of "Installing .NET for Apache Spark on Azure HDInsight's Jupyter Notebooks". I think this is more accurate and descriptive. Thanks!

> This how-to provides the steps to install .NET for Apache Spark interactive notebooks on Azure HDInsight Spark Clusters.

Author: We are installing new Jupyter notebooks but adding Spark .NET kernal and Spark Magic, Livy changes. We are not modifying any existing notebooks.

## Background

> To provide the ability to use .NET for Apache Spark within your Jupyter Notebooks, an important pre-requisite is a C# REPL that is capable of executing your C# code line-by-line (and preserving execution state, where needed). We have integrated [dotnet-try](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our official dotnet REPL to provide you with the best experience.

Author: Sounds good. Changed to `Try .NET`.

> To provide the ability to use .NET for Apache Spark within your Jupyter Notebooks, an important pre-requisite is a C# REPL that is capable of executing your C# code line-by-line (and preserving execution state, where needed). We have integrated [dotnet-try](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our official dotnet REPL to provide you with the best experience.

Author: Sounds good. Updated

> To provide the end-to-end integration, we had to add a Jupyter kernel along with necessary modifications to [Apache Livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic). Since these code changes have not yet been merged into the respective open source projects, to be able to get the out-of-box .NET for Apache Spark experience, you will have to patch components in your HDInsight Spark Cluster with the binaries we provide.

Author: We install a SparkDotnet kernel to Jupyter kernal

> To provide the end-to-end integration, we had to add a Jupyter kernel along with necessary modifications to [Apache Livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic). Since these code changes have not yet been merged into the respective open source projects, to be able to get the out-of-box .NET for Apache Spark experience, you will have to patch components in your HDInsight Spark Cluster with the binaries we provide.

Author: I have made some changes accordingly. Please let me know what you think.

> To provide the end-to-end integration, we had to add a Jupyter kernel along with necessary modifications to [Apache Livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic). Since these code changes have not yet been merged into the respective open source projects, to be able to get the out-of-box .NET for Apache Spark experience, you will have to patch components in your HDInsight Spark Cluster with the binaries we provide.

Reviewer: Added a few additional feedback points in another review :)

> To enable .NET for Apache Spark through the Jupyter Notebook Experience, you would have to follow a few manual steps through [Ambari](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-manage-ambari) and submit [script actions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux) on HDInsight Spark cluster.

Author: Removed.

>**Disclaimer:** Please note that this is *experimental* and not supported by the HDInsight Spark team. *Use it at your own risk*. Please do remember that we are working hard to get these changes into the respective projects so you do not need these manual steps.

## Pre-requisites:
Create an [Azure HDInsight Spark](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-an-hdinsight-spark-cluster) cluster (by visiting the **[Azure Portal](https;//portal.azure.com)**, selecting **+ Create a Resource**, and creating a new Azure HDInsight cluster resource), select the **Overview** tab on your cluster. Ensure you have created a cluster with **Spark 2.4** and **HDI 4.0**.

> ## Installation Procedure

Author: Added!

> Open the [Azure portal](https://ms.portal.azure.com/#home). Select **HDInsight Spark cluster** you created in the previous step.

Author: Make sense. I have changed.

### Step 1. Stop Livy Server
1.1 From the portal, select **Overview**, and then select **Ambari home**. If prompted, enter the cluster login credentials for the cluster.

> <img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/select-ambari.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

Author: Changed for all. Thanks!

1.2 Select **Spark2**, and then select **LIVY FOR SPARK2 SERVER**.

> <img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/select-livyserver.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

Reviewer 2: This image doesn't render in preview: https://review.docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/spark/how-to-guides/hdinsight-notebook-installation?branch=pr-en-us-17119#installation-procedure

Author: It's get rendered now.

> 1.3 Select **hn0... host**, stop **Livy for Spark2 Server** if started. When prompted, click **OK** to proceed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.3 Select **hn0... host**, and stop **Livy for Spark2 Server** if it is running. When prompted, select **OK** to proceed.
```

- Select hn0 as shown below.
<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/select-host.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

- Stop Livy for Spark2 Server.
<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/stop-server.png" alt="StopLivyServerImage" width="800"/>

> 1.4 Please follow the same step for hn1... host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Repeat the previous steps for **hn1... host**.
```

### Step 2. Submit HDInsight Script Action

> Return to your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, and select **Script actions** from the options on the left. You'll submit one script action to deploy SparkDotnet REPL on HDInsight Spark cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Return to your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, and select **Script actions** from the options on the left. You'll submit one script action to deploy the SparkDotnet REPL on your HDInsight Spark cluster.
```

> Return to your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, and select **Script actions** from the options on the left. You'll submit one script action to deploy SparkDotnet REPL on HDInsight Spark cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Return to your HDInsight cluster in the Azure Portal, and select **Script actions** from the options on the left menu. Next, you submit a script action to deploy the SparkDotnet REPL on your HDInsight Spark cluster.
```

> Submit Script Action on both Head node and Worker node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will submit the script action on both the head and worker nodes.
```

Reviewer: Or, since the bulleted list below is great and outlines all of the necessary steps and info, could we remove this sentence (since users will see they need to run on the head and workers below anyways)?

Reviewer 2: +1 for removing this line

Author: Removed.

Run `install-interactive-notebook.sh` on the cluster using [HDInsight Script Actions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux):

* Script type: Custom
* Name: Install Sparkdotnet Interactive Notebook Experience (or anything that is descriptive)

> * Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `install-interactive-notebook.sh`. Create a new file named **install-interactive-notebook.sh** in your local computer, and paste the [install-interactive-notebook.sh contents](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/spark/master/deployment/HDI-Spark/Notebooks/install-interactive-notebook.sh). Then, upload the script to a [URI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux#understand-script-actions) that's accessible from the HDInsight cluster. (e.g. `https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/install-interactive-notebook.sh`)

Reviewer: Can we include uploading the bash script as a separate step earlier in the doc? Starting off with "The URI to which you uploaded..." makes it sound like this was already explained and thus completed earlier

Author: Sounds good. I have separate this step from the rest.

> * Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `install-interactive-notebook.sh`. Create a new file named **install-interactive-notebook.sh** in your local computer, and paste the [install-interactive-notebook.sh contents](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/spark/master/deployment/HDI-Spark/Notebooks/install-interactive-notebook.sh). Then, upload the script to a [URI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux#understand-script-actions) that's accessible from the HDInsight cluster. (e.g. `https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/install-interactive-notebook.sh`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `install-interactive-notebook.sh`. Create a new file named **install-interactive-notebook.sh** on your local computer, and paste the contents of [install-interactive-notebook.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/spark/master/deployment/HDI-Spark/Notebooks/install-interactive-notebook.sh). Then, upload the script to a [URI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux#understand-script-actions) that's accessible from the HDInsight cluster. (e.g. `https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/install-interactive-notebook.sh`)
```

> * Bash script URI: The URI to which you uploaded `install-interactive-notebook.sh`. Create a new file named **install-interactive-notebook.sh** in your local computer, and paste the [install-interactive-notebook.sh contents](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/spark/master/deployment/HDI-Spark/Notebooks/install-interactive-notebook.sh). Then, upload the script to a [URI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/hdinsight-hadoop-customize-cluster-linux#understand-script-actions) that's accessible from the HDInsight cluster. (e.g. `https://<my storage account>.blob.core.windows.net/<my container>/<some dir>/install-interactive-notebook.sh`)

Reviewer 2: This might be better represented in a table. See example: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/spark/tutorials/hdinsight-deployment

Author: Changed!

* Node type(s): Head and Worker

> * Parameters: Sparkdotnet version. For example, if you want to install Sparkdotnet version 0.6.0 then it would be `0.6.0`.

Reviewer: How will users know which version of .NET for Spark they want to use? Where can they get this info (i.e. maybe link to the github.com/spark/releases page)?

Reviewer: Also, I notice that we use a combination of "Sparkdotnet," "SparkDotnet," and ".NET for Apache Spark" throughout. Should we just use .NET for Apache Spark/.NET for Spark everywhere? Or are there scenarios in which we should say Sparkdotnet (in which case, we should make the capitalization consistent/follow any official guidelines).

Reviewer 2: Yes, it should be .NET for Apache Spark everywhere. Maybe .NET for Spark if that's something you use commonly (as long as Apache Spark is used at the beginning). Should not use any variation of SparkDotnet.

Author: I have added the release and change it all to .NET for Apache Spark to be consistent.

> The following captures the setting for a HDInsight Script Action on Head node and Worker node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following image displays the settings for the HDInsight script action:
```

Reviewer 2: I think you can remove this line and use good, descriptive alt text.

Author: Added the alt text.

<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/install-notebook-scriptaction.png" alt="ScriptActionImage" width="500"/>

> After you see green checkmarks next to the status of both script actions, you can move to the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Submit your script action. After you see green checkmarks next to the status of both script actions, you can move to the next step.
```
Also, when we say "both script actions" here, does that mean the user will see 2 different script actions displayed in the Portal, although they only had to submit one?

Reviewer 2: It might be more simple to say "move to the next step when green checkmarks appear next to the status of both script actions"

Author: It has to be two green checkmarks since users need to submit two script actions. I will keep it simple as "Move to the next step when green checkmarks appear next to the status of both script actions"

### Step 3. Start Livy Server

> Please follow the above [Step 1](#step-1-stop-livy-server) to **Start** Livy for Spark2 Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please follow the above [Step 1](#step-1-stop-livy-server) to now **Start** (rather than **Stop**) the Livy for Spark2 Server for hosts hn0 and hn1.
```

Reviewer 2: This might get confusing. Better to just outline the steps for starting the server. No need for screenshot.

Author: yes, I didn't put any screenshot here since this will be similar to step 1-how to stop the server.

> ### Step 4. Set up Spark Default Configs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set up Spark default configurations
```

> 4.1 From the portal, select **Overview**, and then select **Ambari home**. If prompted, enter the cluster login credentials for the cluster.

Reviewer: Users need to enter Ambari Home to restart the Livy Server in step 3 above, right? If so, we should move these 2 sentences to step 3.

Author: Yes, but step3 is to follow step1, and those 2 sentences instruction has already provided in step1. I don't think we need to repeat this. Does that make sense to you?

Reviewer: Ahh okay I see, I had missed that. Makes sense, thank you!

> 4.2 Select **Spark2**, and then Select **CONFIGS**, then click on **Custom spark2-defaults**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.2 Select **Spark2**, and then **CONFIGS**. Then select **Custom spark2-defaults**.
```

<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/spark-configs.png" alt="SetConfigsImage" width="800"/>

> 4.3 Click on **Add Property...** to add Spark default settings.

Reviewer: Do you think we can/should add a screenshot of **Add Property**? Since we've shown images for most of the other steps, and I think they've been really helpful.

Author: I have added the screenshot for **Add Property**.

> You will add a total of 3 individual properties. Add them 1 one at a time, all using **TEXT** Property Type in Single property add mode. Make sure you don’t have any extra spaces before or after any of the keys/values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are three individual properties. Add them one at a time using the **TEXT** Property Type in Single property add mode. Check that you don't have any extra spaces before or after any of the keys/values.
```

> - Property 1:

Reviewer 2: Use * instead of - for bulleted list.

    - Key:&ensp;&ensp;`spark.dotnet.shell.command`
    - Value: `/usr/share/dotnet-tools/dotnet-try,kernel-server,--default-kernel,csharp`
- Property 2:
    - Key:&ensp;&ensp;`spark.dotnet.packages`

>     - Value: `["nuget: Microsoft.Spark, 0.6.0", "nuget: Microsoft.Spark.Extensions.Delta, 0.6.0"]`

Reviewer: Should probably add some sort of note here that users should choose the version of .NET for Spark that they had included in the script action.

Author: Added.

- Property 3:
    - Key:&ensp;&ensp;`spark.dotnet.interpreter`
    - Value: `try`

For example, the following captures the setting for adding property 1:

<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/add-sparkconfig.png" alt="SetConfigsImage" width="800"/>

After adding those 3 properties, select **SAVE**. If you see a warning screen of config recommendations, select **PROCEED ANYWAY**.

> 4.4 Restart affected components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.4 Restart affected components.

```

After adding the new properties, you need to restart components that were affected by the changes. At the top, select **RESTART**, and then **Restart All Affected** from the drop-down.

<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/restart-affected.png" alt="SetConfigsImage" width="800"/>

When prompted, select **CONFIRM RESTART ALL** to continue, then click **OK** to finish.

## Submit Jobs through Jupyter Notebook

> After finishing previous steps, now you can submit your jobs through Jupyter Notebook!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After finishing the previous steps, you can now submit your .NET for Apache Spark jobs through Jupyter Notebooks!
```

> After finishing previous steps, now you can submit your jobs through Jupyter Notebook!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you've completed the previous steps, you can submit your jobs through Jupyter Notebooks!
```

> 1. Create a new .NET for Apache Spark notebook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 1. Create a new .NET for Apache Spark notebook
```

Reviewer 2: The numbered list is correct. Be sure to indent anything under each number by 3 spaces.

Author: Should here be number 1, 2 or Step 1, Step 2? @mamccrea / @bamurtaugh

Reviewer: I thought "Step 1" looked nice, but if @mamccrea says just the numbers are correct, then we should stick with that. Perhaps the indentation she mentioned would help with the formatting for which I was trying to account.

Author: Sure, changed! Thanks.

> [Launch Jupyter notebook](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-a-jupyter-notebook) from your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, then select **New** > **.NET Spark (C#)** to create a notebook.

Reviewer: I think including a screenshot of where to launch a Jupyter notebook (one of the first images in that doc: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/media/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql/hdinsight-spark-open-jupyter-interactive-spark-sql-query.png) would be more specific and thus useful, rather than including this link.

Author: Added the screenshot!

> [Launch Jupyter notebook](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-a-jupyter-notebook) from your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, then select **New** > **.NET Spark (C#)** to create a notebook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Launch a Jupyter notebook](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-a-jupyter-notebook) from your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal. Then select **New** > **.NET Spark (C#)** to create a notebook.
```

> [Launch Jupyter notebook](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-a-jupyter-notebook) from your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, then select **New** > **.NET Spark (C#)** to create a notebook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   [Launch Jupyter notebook](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/hdinsight/spark/apache-spark-jupyter-spark-sql-use-portal#create-a-jupyter-notebook) from your HDI cluster in the Azure Portal, then select **New** > **.NET Spark (C#)** to create a notebook.
```

<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/create-sparkdotnet-notebook.png" alt="JupyterNotebookImage" width="800"/>

> 2. Submit Jobs using .NET for Apache Spark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2. Submit Jobs using .NET for Apache Spark
```

> > **Note:** After the kernel is ready, then you can start submitting jobs. The following shows a sample to submit jobs through notebook.

Reviewer: Would the note flow better/look better if put in step 1 (right above the step 2 heading)?

> > **Note:** After the kernel is ready, then you can start submitting jobs. The following shows a sample to submit jobs through notebook.

Reviewer 2: Is this note necessary? I think we can just go directly into the steps.

Reviewer: I think it would depend on how long it takes for the kernel to become ready? Is this usually instant, or is there a risk there could be a delay and a user might start trying to run code before it's ready?

Author: Yes, I agree. This note is necessary to avoid errors that user may encounter when starting run jobs.

> - Start a spark session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Start a Spark Session using the keyword `spark`
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can make this even more clear - "Add the keyword `spark` to the first cell of the notebook and select **Run** to start a Spark session."

<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/start-sparksession.png" alt="SubmitSparkJobImage" width="800"/>

> - Create a Dataframe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a DataFrame
```

Reviewer 2: Please explain each of these steps with code snippets. "Use the following code snippet to create a DataFrame" .... etc.

Author: Added code snippet with explanation. Thanks!

<img src="../media/hdi-spark-notebooks/create-df.png" alt="SubmitSparkJobImage" width="800"/>

> - Register Udf and use Udf via data frames

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Register a user-defined function (UDF) and use it via the DataFrame
```

---
title: Installing .NET for Apache Spark on Azure HDInsight's Jupyter Notebooks
description: Learn how to install .NET for Apache Spark on Azure HDInsight's Jupyter Notebooks
ms.date: 02/20/2020
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.custom: mvc,how-to
---

# Installing .NET for Apache Spark on Azure HDInsight's Jupyter Notebooks

This how-to provides the steps to install .NET for Apache Spark on Azure HDInsight's Jupyter Notebooks.

## Background

> While we can deploy .NET for Apache Spark on HDI clusters through the command line/Azure portal (you can check out [how to deploy a .NET for Apache Spark application to Azure HDInsight](../tutorials/hdinsight-deployment.md) and [how to submit a .NET for Apache Spark job to Azure HDInsight](hdinsight-deploy-methods.md)), notebooks provide a more interactive and iterative experience.

Author: Thanks for your suggestion! I have made changes accordingly.

> Azure HDI clusters come with Jupyter notebook, so let's look how to configure those Jupyter notebooks to run .NET for Apache Spark. In order to use .NET for Apache Spark within your Jupyter Notebooks, a C# REPL is needed to execute your C# code line-by-line and to preserve execution state when necessary. We have integrated [Try .NET](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our official dotnet REPL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Azure HDI clusters already come with Jupyter notebooks, so let's explore how to configure these Jupyter notebooks to run .NET for Apache Spark. In order to use .NET for Apache Spark within your Jupyter Notebooks, a C# REPL is needed to execute your C# code line-by-line and to preserve execution state when necessary. We have integrated [Try .NET](https://github.com/dotnet/try) as our official .NET REPL.
```

> To provide the end-to-end notebook integration, we added a .NET for Apache Spark kernel to Jupyter kernel along with necessary modifications to [Apache Livy](https://github.com/apache/incubator-livy) and [sparkmagic](https://github.com/jupyter-incubator/sparkmagic) to HDI notebooks. Since these code changes have not yet been merged into the respective open source projects, you'll need to modify some components in your HDInsight Spark cluster to utilize .NET for Apache Spark in Jupyter notebooks.

Reviewer: The first sentence is a bit confusing to me, and I think it may just be because it is so long and has several specific technologies listed. Perhaps we can break into two sentences? 

"... we added a .NET for Apache Spark kernel to the Jupyter kernel. We also added the necessary modifications..."

Also, I'm unclear based on the current structure of this sentence what's being added. Is Livy being modified/added with the kernel? Or is Livy being added/modified alongside sparkmagic in the HDI notebooks themselves?

Author: I have separated the long sentence to make it clear. So I don't think we need to tell user so much details about how we are making the modification which might confuse them. It's changes in both Livy and sparkmagic. And we also add Spark .NET to Jupyter kernel. Please let me know what you think.
